---
layout: post
title: "Invasive Species and Landscaping"
author: "Nick Cooke"
categories: story
tags: [story]
image: kudzu.png
---

Last weekend, my parents and I ventured out to Red Top Mountain State Park in Cartersville, Georgia to enjoy the autumn air and colorful leaves. While walking through a forested area with a noticeable amount of fallen trees, one of my parents made the comment that the fallen trees should at least be cut up and distributed as firewood, rather than left to slowly rot away next to the trail. 

Initially, I thought the comment made sense enough– there were quite a few downed trees that were easily accessible, and, given an assumed decrease in park visits due to COVID-19, some extra revenue generated through the park surely could help contribute to various operational costs and services. But then I thought of the other side of the issue. I had been doing a fair amount of investigative research regarding invasive species and recalled from my notes that transporting firewood is a common activity that can aid in the introduction of an invasive species to an area. Firewood can easily harbor tree-damaging fungal spores and insects or larvae that, when transported to different [ecosystems]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html), can prove to be invasive species that can cause great damage to the [environment]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html). 

Transporting firewood is a great example of an everyday activity that can damage the environment through the introduction of an invasive species. A group going camping a few hours away might think they are being extra prepared by packing away some firewood to get their soon-to-be campfire started, but firewood should be kept 10 miles or less from where the tree the wood belonged to was downed (DMF Campaign, n.d.). 

Moving firewood is hardly the only activity that can, while seemingly harmless, contribute to the spread of invasive species. For instance, when ships release their [ballast water]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html), or water from their ballast tanks and cargo holds mean to stabilize the vessel, they can [inadvertently release]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html) [alien]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html) marine species into the surrounding waters of the ship (USDA, n.d.). While this is a documented issue that has arisen from improved transportation channels and increased globalized trade, there are numerous other activities performed daily by the average person that can contribute to the spread of invasive species. Some of these common activities that can lead to the spread of invasive species include landscaping and gardening. 

Typically, plants are chosen in landscaping and gardening projects for their aesthetics and ability to survive in the surrounding environment. While these are valid factors, it is increasingly important to choose plants that are either native to the area or at least considered non-invasive to that region. Surprisingly, not all the plants available to oneself locally can be considered “safe” to plant. In fact, many species that have been determined to be invasive species for a given area can be found at the area’s local garden centers and nurseries (MIPN, n.d.). 

It is important to make the distinction between invasive species and purely non-native species. While all invasive species are non-native species by definition, not all non-native species are necessarily invasive. Many plants like garden hydrangeas, tulips, and dwarf junipers may not be native to a region, such as the southeast or midwest, yet they can grow in these regions non-invasively. Invasive plants like the Japanese Honeysuckle were originally brought to the United States as a decorative plant for gardens and lawns (PennState Extension, 2019). When grown in the eastern United States, the Japanese Honeysuckle grows aggressively, forming thick mats of entangled vines that, while seasonally covered with pretty, fragrant flowers, can smother the plants below it, killing them (UF IFAS, n.d.). 

Since the rate at which an invasive species spreads is highly dependent on its population growth and dispersal capability, it is often difficult to assess the potential scope of the damage such species can cause  (O’Reilly-Nugent et al., 2016). When considering [horticultural]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html) activities like gardening and landscaping however, the dispersal of invasive species is aided by way of the person planting them. To viny plants like English Ivy and Kudzu that are often invasive to non-native areas, a lawn (or even a building) is a perfect invitation to disperse vines and aggressively grow (Myers, 2020). 

Thankfully, there are plenty of resources out there to guide gardeners and landscapers on the do’s and don'ts of landscaping and gardening with native plants. Most of the time, invasive plants can be replaced with native plants that offer a similar aesthetic to their invasive counterpart. For instance, instead of planting Japanese Honeysuckles, plant twinberry or wild honeysuckles native to the local region (MIPN, n.d.). In certain areas of the southern United States, plant Frogfruit, a ground covering plant native to the region, instead of English Ivy when a ground cover is desired (Carrington, 2020). These native variants will not grow aggressively and smother local flora like the invasive species do. When selecting local alternatives for one’s garden or lawn, it is important to plant native species in locations that will meet the plant’s needs for moisture, soil richness, and light availability (MIPN, n.d.). 

For the best guidance on cultivating a garden or lawn with native flora, one should refer to local horticultural sources and location specific internet research to identify beautiful plants that will complement their project, not invade it!
