---
layout: post
title: "Invasive Ads"
author: "William Braga"
categories: story
tags: [story]
image: lilyofthevalley.jpg
---

I’m settling down for the night and decide to put on a fun and casual show – perhaps Broad City on Hulu. It’s been a packed Thursday, and I just need to fry my brain with some TV and let the day’s stress be drained. Maybe it’s not the most mindful way to handle it, but it’ll do for today. Anything else would have too high of an activation energy… Before the guilt of my concession starts to sink in, my hands instinctually reach for the remote and play the next episode, crudely cutting off my mind’s voice from the discussion. With mental awareness out of the picture, I’m properly receptive of the incoming content. Cue the colorful, psychedelic intro scene with the title card morphing in and out of different shapes, popping like a cartoon balloon and being instantly reconstituted. 

No.

I’m subject to gray-scale. The music is solemn and suspenseful. I forgot Hulu has ads. The scene opens like a generic anti-cigarette or political defamation campaign. My eyes glaze over and my heart rate rises in tune with the invasive, unskippable content. But then, color again meets my eyes. In contrast to the washed out sky, sun, concrete, the thriving green canopy dotted with lavender and ruby calyxes and vibrant yellow sepals commands my attention. It’s a beautiful aerial shot taken just as the flowers are at full bloom and the leaves are as strong and full as ever. I catch a glimpse of the undergrowth – the myriad wiry plant stems intertwined like headphones after a wash cycle. There’s no way to map the subfloral stems to the three-parted, pinnate leaves that grasp up into the air. Only an inch of stem is visible; below lies the mysterious cavern conspicuously hidden away from light. As the camera pans out, the vibrancy and detail are lost. Only a green carpet coats the earth. Having fallen prey to the foliage’s song, its vines begin to stretch past my screen. They slither across the floor, competing to see who will gain the most ground.

Conquistadors! 

They claim my living room, sofa, and eventually my personal space with righteous superiority. Submerged and suffocated under the sea of vegetation, all I can do is bear witness to the ensuing destruction. Now, sharing the perspective of all that lies under the kudzu, I finally understand upon what the canopy is founded.

Now, I may be slightly misremembering my first encounter with kudzu, but I assure you the sentiment about it is precise – especially when I am betrayed by its appearance. See, the thing with invasive plants is that most of them look magnificent [(Simone, 2020)]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/references.html). Maybe it’s why many of them came to plague us. Ignorant, albeit well-intentioned, house planters frequently cultivate these monsters thinking they can [contain]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html) them, but instead breed little gremlins that attack after midnight. It’s hard to really blame them, considering the anti-cigarette era of invasive species propaganda has not yet been reached. Instead, we have the online photo albums of the “10 beautiful but invasive perennials you do not want in your garden.” No backed threats, no incitations of fear, just commiseration that we *reeeally* shouldn’t be planting them… even though they could really tie that garden together. 

It’s not just online blogs. The [Georgia Invasive Species Task Force (n.d.)]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/references.html) basically commits the same mistakes, just not with the same repressed planting urges seeping into their diction. They provide critical information about [control efforts]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html), but they surround their texts with these photogenic close-ups of the species. I do concede that the close-ups are critical for proper identification and they do offer a couple images showing some of their potential canopy growth, but nowhere do they sufficiently reveal the true nature of these villains. Where is the photo evidence of invasives strangling endemic species and driving total war by stripping the soil of its nutrients? To me, it seems a case of ill placed affection where antagonism should actually lie. These publications are meant to be persuasive; their focus should be on [eradication]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html), not to make some noncommittal plea or observational study. 

We are now posed with the question: how do we effectively communicate the danger of invasive species? On the one hand, I do not believe commercials about sentient plant murderers would be taken very seriously.  On the other hand, the objective, scientific papers lack the pathos appeal necessary for targeting a mainstream audience. If the right emotional connection could be struck with the media consumer, the producer would need to consider the possible unintended consequences. In a sort of scare campaign, much care would need to be taken in *defining* ‘invasive species.’ An invasive species in a foreign territory is obviously not invasive (although it could have invasive-like traits) in its motherland. Therefore, the only path forward I see in our education comes from local-level efforts. Scientists need to delineate the facts every local must know about their ecosystem and journalists or marketers must convey that content with persuasion and responsibility. Without these environmental pushes, there will be no end to the recreational planters who are accomplice to their food web’s [trophic cascades]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.html). 

