---
layout: post
title: "No Shoot No Gun Please"
author: "Markian Hromiak"
categories: story
tags: [story]
image: feral_hogs.jpeg
---

[Invasive species]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.md) are widespread in America and damage various facets of state services (Walsh et. al, 2016), [biodiversity]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.md) (Dueñas et al., 2018) and human health through disease spread (Indiana University, n.d.). With all of the downsides, why haven’t measures been taken to remove invasive species? After all, we should be able to figure out what species are invasive in a habitat, find ways to stop their spread, and, finally, work towards diminishing the population to zero, right? Political and funding reasons aside, some of these measures have been put in place. Well, about that. One big issue is that most if not all measures taken that include forcefully removing a species have ended very poorly. And why is this? Let’s go through a couple of examples of why a forceful approach needs a much higher level of organization than simply controlling an invasive species’ growth, and a much higher level of focus than is currently provided.

While I personally am not a fan of the sport, hunting is enjoyed as a pastime is some social circles in America. It’s even a viable profession to organize hunting parties and excursions out into the wilderness. There is actually a company that will fly you out in a helicopter to shoot wild boars (Helibacon, 2020). The website’s in the citation at the bottom for your morbid interest. The reason why this company exists is due to a release of pigs into the wild some time ago, with a lack of predators leading to a wild population explosion. As of 2019, there were about seven million hogs in the United States creating $2 billion in damage each year, and even with the hunting measures being taken, only around 25,000 to 30,000 hogs are killed annually (Chrobak, 2019). So this measure that is meant to destroy the feral hog population slowly evolved into one where the feral hog population is not only unchecked, as the reproduction rate is higher than the hunting fatality rate, but encouraged for the sake of profit. The handling of wild hogs changed focus from long-term stability to short-term utility. What’s worse is that now, given the huge population of hogs, it is nearly impossible to properly eradicate them without severely damaging the surrounding [environment]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.md).

Another classic example of a strategy gone wrong doesn’t take place in America, but rather in India. If you’ve heard of the “Cobra Effect”, then you know where this is going. When Britain colonized India, Delhi, a city containing New Dehli, India’s capital, suffered from a surplus of cobras roaming the streets, houses, sometimes even inside of cars (Davies & Harrigan, 2019). Because of this the British government placed a bounty on each dead cobra presented to them. This seemed like a good idea: incentivize the deaths of cobras and you will pay the public to act as exterminators. The issue came when someone realized that killing cobras meant that the pay would end when the cobras were all dead. So why not raise cobras yourself for a sustainable income? The idea spread like wildfire, eventually reaching the ears of the British officials, who shut down the operation by lifting the bounty. Well, great. So now the public thinks along the lines “now I’m stuck in a house full of cobras that are worth nothing!”. The natural response to this was to release all of the cobras back into the city, wild, etc. As a result, the species flourished to greater numbers than before the bounty had been placed! (Davies & Harrigan, 2019)

What were the shared shortcomings with both of these stories? We can’t reasonably expect to find a solution for all invasive species from just these stories alone; indeed, every circumstance of forcefully controlling a species has its own situation to consider, but we should be able to glean something useful. What I’m hinting at here is a severe lack of focus and oversight regarding both programs. First, the Cobras removal program carried the message “bring us dead cobras” rather than “permanently remove cobras from Delhi”. Likewise, the hog outbreak response treats the damages as more of a “cost of entertainment” than an actual ecological hazard. Both strategies fail to see the end goal as removing the invasive species. Perhaps these strategies could have prevailed if a motto was adopted or if a more forceful response was taken; however, it is obvious that attempts to remove invasive species must follow a stricter organization in order to properly [ameliorate]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.md) the effects caused by invasive species.

Though it is too late to fix these two strategies, we can learn from these failures and apply better organization and focus to future invasive removal programs. Hopefully, by focusing resources and effort into an all-out removal, the amount of invasive species from [biomes]({{ site.github.url }}/pages/glossary.md) in the United States will decrease, and with them the spread of disease and infrastructure cost.


References:

Dueñas et al. (2018). The role played by invasive species in interactions with endangered and
threatened species in the United States: a systematic review. Biodiversity and
Conservation, 27, 3171-3183. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10531-018-1595-x

Indiana University. (n.d.). COVID-19 and environmental change: The social and environmental
factors contributing to the rise of zoonotic diseases. Retrieved October 05, 2020, from
https://eri.iu.edu/tools-and-resources/fact-sheets/zoonotic-diseases.html

Walsh, J. R. & Carpenter, S. R. & Zanden, J. V. (2016). Invasive species triggers a massive loss
of ecosystem services through a trophic cascade. PNAS, 113(15), 4081-4085.			https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1600366113

Helibacon (2020). Helicopter Hog Hunting. Texas Helicopter Hog Hunting. https://www.helibacon.com/texas-helicopter-hog-hunting/

Davies, A. & Harrigan, J. R. (2019). The Cobra Effect: Lessons in Unintended Consequences. Foundation for Economic Education. https://fee.org/articles/the-cobra-effect-lessons-in-unintended-consequences/
